September 2011 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities  
Management Practice  Capital and Programmatic Costs  Potential Funding Sources  Notes and Sources  
practices in the region  Water Conservation Districts)  
DM5: Implement  $100-$4,000 per  Individual  Low Range: Sod based  
Tier 3 and 4 agricul  million gallonsb, c  investment;  rotation with conservation  
tural water conser­ incentive programs  tillage  
vation practices in  (GSWCC; Soil and  High range: Variable rate  
the region with the  Water Conservation  irrigation  
support of incentive  Districts)  
programs  
DM6: Manage new  No new costs  EPD  Withdrawal permits issued  
agricultural water  associated with  after the 2006 Flint Plan  
withdrawal permits  implementing  have a $250 application fee  
in the region accord­ existing permit  
ing to the 2006 Flint  program  
River Basin Water  
Development and  
Conservation Plan  
DM7: Create an  Basic program  Georgia General  
awards program to  could be  Assembly, private  
recognize  implemented for  donations  
agricultural irrigators  approximately  
for exemplary  $10,000 annually  
implementation of  
best management  
practices (BMPs) for  
water conservation  
SUPPLY MANAGEMENT AND FLOW AUGMENTATION (SF)  
Issues Addressed  Surface water availability sustainability criteria; groundwater sustainable yields  
Gaps Addressed  Surface water modeled shortfalls at Bainbridge (Flint) and Alapaha (Suwannee); groundwater modeled shortfalls in Upper Floridan (Dougherty Plain) and Claiborne  
Council Goals Addressed  1, 2, 3, 4, 5  
SF1: Evaluate  Cost of evaluation:  Municipal or  Reservoir cost dependent  
storage options in  $0.5 to $3 million  industrial capital  on land value and con­ 
the Upper Flint  (dependent on  investment; state  struction materials; costs of  
Region that can  scope)  and federal funding;  piping, land acquisition,  
provide for supply  private investment;  permitting, conveyance,  
and flow  water/wastewater  and treatment not included;  


UPPER FLINT 

Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities  
Management Practice  Capital and Programmatic Costs  Potential Funding Sources  Notes and Sources  
augmentation in dry  revenues  Cost estimate for new  
periods  storage:$10,000-$350,000  
**HIGH PRIORITY**  per million gallons (annual  
MANAGEMENT  average yield); Cost  
PRACTICE  estimate for increasing capacity of existing storage: $10,000-$150,000 per million gallons annual average yield);b, c Evaluation may include costs for (but not limited to): development of yield and performance criteria, site selection; property assessments/appraisals; definition of permit requirements  
SF2: Evaluate  $1,000-$100,000  Federal or state  Well costs do not include  
streamflow  per million gallons  agencies  land acquisition;  
augmentation via  per yearb, c  Costs dependent on well  
direct pumping from  depth, soil conditions,  
aquifers in order to  piping distance, and  
support in-stream  number of pump stations;   
flows in dry periods  Cost estimates include piping and treatment for municipal supply wells; Costs of wells for irrigation, which does not require treatment, may be lessc  
SF3: Replace  $1,000-$100,000  Individual  See comments for SF2  
surface water  per million gallons  investment;  above  
withdrawals with  annual yieldb, c  incentive programs  
groundwater  (GSWCC; Soil and  
withdrawals, where  Water Conservation  
feasible  Districts)  
SF4: Use Aquifer  $30,000-$225,000  Municipal or  Dependent on well depth,  
Storage and  per million gallons  industrial capital  soil conditions, piping  
Recovery (ASR) as  annual yieldb, c  investment;  distance, and number of  
needed for future  water/wastewater  pump stationsc  
water supplies in the  revenues   
region, with  

September 2011 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities  
Management Practice  Capital and Programmatic Costs  Potential Funding Sources  Notes and Sources  
thorough evaluation of potential impacts  
SF5: Encourage continued development of farm ponds in the region through existing incentive programs  $12.50 per cubic yard of earth excavation and grading  Individual investment; Incentive programs from NRCS and GSWCC  Estimated cost for earth excavation and grading; Cost does not include pumping and piping costs  
WATER RETURNS MANAGEMENT (RM)  
Issues Addressed  Surface water availability sustainability criteria  
Gaps Addressed  Surface water modeled shortfalls at Bainbridge (Flint) and Alapaha (Suwannee)  
Council Goals Addressed  1, 3, 4  
RM1: Restrict the development of new land application systems for wastewater treatment  No new costs  
WATER QUALITY (WQ)  
Issues Addressed  Point and nonpoint source water pollution  
Gaps Addressed  Water quality violations  
Council Goals Addressed  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6  
WQ1: Improve enforcement of existing permits and regulations and implementation of existing plans and practices  Costs to improve implementation and enforcement of existing programs are variable  State and federal funding; permit fees  Need to evaluate whether implementation and enforcement can be improved without additional expenditures; costs could include (but not limited to): site visits, training, enhanced tools/practices  
WQ2: Improve implementation of nonpoint source controls  $0-$2 per capitac  State and federal funding and incentive programs; private investment  Costs could include (but not limited to): education; new ordinancesc  
WQ3: Increase  $0-$2 per capitac  State and federal  Low range: print materials  

7-11 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities  
Management Practice  Capital and Programmatic Costs  Potential Funding Sources  Notes and Sources  
education directed  funding and  High range: mass media  
toward improving  incentive programs;  
water quality  local governments; water/ wastewater revenues  
WQ4: Improve  $4,000-$8,000 per  State agencies  Grab sampling includes  
water quality  site (grab sample);  monitoring chemical water  
monitoring  $5,000-$20,000  per site (habitat and benthos monitoring)c  quality annually for fecal coliform bacteria and traditional stormwater parameters (no metals); Habitat and benthos monitoring includes monitoring biological water quality annually looking at habitat and macroinvertebrate populationsc  
WQ5: Utilize  Variable  State agencies; local  
technology to  governments;  
improve water  water/wastewater  
resource  revenues  
management  
information  
Notes and Sources: a) Programmatic costs will vary widely depending on the specific actions selected. Further study and data are needed to refine the evaluation of costs and benefits of selected practices. All values should be viewed as planning level numbers that can be improved through further study and data collection regarding the level of baseline implementation already in place and the corresponding water quantity and quality benefits achieved. b) Cost per million gallons is a cost benefit metric, which is defined as the total 2010 costs divided by the total millions of gallons yielded or saved through conservation per year. c) Source: Georgia EPD. Supplemental Guidance for Regional Planning Contractors: Water Management Practice Cost Comparison, April 2010. Available on the EPD water planning website: http://www.georgiawaterplanning.org/pages/technical_guidance/regional_planning_guidance.php  

UPPER FLINT 

September 2011 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
7.3 Alignment with Other Plans 
The development of this plan by the Upper Flint Council builds upon a knowledge base developed in previous planning efforts by state and local governments and authorities. Numerous existing water resources related plans and information sources were consulted in the development of this plan. More information on these documents can be found in Supplemental Document 5 - Existing Regulatory and Local Plan Review and Supplemental Document 14 - Management Practice Selection Technical Memorandum, which are available on the Upper Flint Council’s website (http://www.upperflint.org/pages/our_plan/index.php). 
The council also ensured alignment with other Regional Water Plans was achieved by participating in a series of joint meetings, especially with the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee and Middle Chattahoochee Councils. In these meetings, council members discussed shared issues relating to resource availability and quality and policy, regulatory, and funding issues. As a result of this collaboration, where possible, the councils coordinated their plans. No conflicts between these regional water plans have been identified. 
Alignment with the existing Flint River Basin Regional Water Development and Conservation Plan (2006) was discussed by the Council throughout the planning process. While the Council’s recommendations improve upon the 2006 plan, none of its recommendations conflict with that plan.1 
7.4 Recommendations to the State 
The Upper Flint Council has identified several recommended actions that would improve water resource management and planning in this region and the state as a whole. 
Information Needs: 
Addressing the following information needs would support improved water resources management and future water planning. Implementation of research and assessments to fill these information needs will require funding (state, federal, other). Implementing agencies are not indicated here; if funding is identified, qualified researchers from state universities, institutions, and agencies, as well as private sector firms, can fulfill these information needs. As new information becomes available, it should be incorporated into future cycles of this regional water planning process, and the resource assessment models should be modified to reflect up-to­date information as it is developed. 
1 The 2006 Flint River Basin Regional Water Development and Conservation Plan is described in Section 2.3 and a copy of the 2006 plan is provided as Supplemental Document 6 on the Upper Flint Council’s website: http://www.upperflint.org/pages/our_plan/index.php 
7-13 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
. 	Improve resource assessment models used in the regional water planning process through increased use of actual water use and resource conditions data. 
. 	Evaluate the environmental and other impacts of low flow conditions modeled at the Bainbridge planning node; determine a low flow criteria below which adverse ecosystem impacts are predicted. 
. 	Increase the number of surface water availability model planning nodes (used as evaluation points) in the Flint River Basin to support more detailed geographic understanding of water resource conditions. 
. 	Improve assessment of groundwater use and recharge to support better understanding of impacts of use on aquifers and streamflow and to support protection for aquifer recharge areas. 
. 	Conduct a comprehensive assessment of baseline implementation of water conservation and water quality Best Management Practices (BMPs) by agricultural producers. The Council recognizes that state and federal agencies have existing programs that measure BMP implementation, but at this time, a comprehensive baseline assessment is lacking. A comprehensive field survey of BMP implementation, such as the one conducted periodically by the forestry industry, would support estimation of potential benefits of future implementation, tracking of implementation progress, and BMP prioritization. 
. 	Evaluate the full water cycle impacts of irrigation and evaporative losses from reservoirs to support better understanding of these factors in water resource planning. 
. 	Encourage State and Federal agencies to reevaluate the scientific justification for the minimum flow requirements for maintaining healthy aquatic ecosystems below Jim Woodruff Lock and Dam in the Apalachicola River. It is the opinion of this Council that the 5,000 cubic feet per second instantaneous flow target in the 1989 Water Control Manual (current operating plan when this plan was published) does not have sound scientific justification. 
. 	Improve implementation of the agricultural water withdrawal metering program of the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission by: 
o 	Completing comprehensive installation of meters 

o 	Ensuring the meters are functioning properly through regular maintenance inspection 

o 	Increasing data collection on parameters including monthly use, crops, inputs 

o 	Reporting aggregate results annually to permittees and policymakers 

o 	Preparing collected data in a manner that will facilitate use in future resource assessments 


UPPER FLINT 

September 2011 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
. 	Evaluate implementation and effectiveness of water conservation practices. Water conservation is a priority focus of the management practices in this plan, but there are currently several practical limitations to measuring progress and impact in conservation implementation, such as inconsistent terminology, lack of available data and the need to identify practical ways of collecting data. Periodically, it will be important to assess the progress and benefit of the water conservation program. 
. 	Evaluate the impacts of farm ponds on stream flows through intercepted drainage and evaporative loss.  Also improve how farm pond withdrawals are incorporated into the resource assessment models. 
. 	Evaluate the use designations assigned to stream reaches in the Upper Flint Region as a part of the Triennial Review of Georgia Water Quality Standards. This review is intended to ensure that water quality performance criteria reflect actual conditions, in terms of both use and quality. 
. 	Conduct a peer review of the lake and watershed water quality assessment models to better understand the methodology as it relates to the output and calibration. Pending the review, the council recommends that the model outputs not be utilized for setting water quality standards in-stream or for any other regulatory purposes including point source permitting in the region. 
Water Policy Recommendations: 
The following recommendations urge the General Assembly and other policymakers in Georgia (e.g., Board of Natural Resources) to pursue actions to improve water resource management in the state and in the Upper Flint Region.  
. 	The Council recommends that the Georgia General Assembly provide funding for continued planning by the regional water councils, as described in Section 14 of the State Water Plan, in order to ensure continued progress toward the vision and goals of the state and regional water plans. The Council also recommends that the General Assembly provide funding to support monitoring of plan implementation, data collection to support future planning by the regional water councils, and continued refinement of water resource assessments used in the development of the regional water plans. 
. 	The Council recommends that the Georgia General Assembly and implementing agencies, such as EPD, explore all possible funding sources to offset or pay for many of the management practices outlined in the Plan. Financial incentives and reimbursement for implementation of practices will expedite the progress needed to achieve the goals of the Plan. 
. 	The Council recommends that EPD and other agencies with water policy responsibilities should design water conservation policy and regulations to recognize and credit water users for conservation practices that they have already implemented. Conservation policies and regulations should prioritize addressing consumptive over nonconsumptive uses. Additionally, 
7-15 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
UPPER FLINT 

conservation policy and regulations should be designed with an emphasis on cost-effectiveness as a key criterion. 
. 	The Council urges the Georgia General Assembly and other state policymakers not to preclude interbasin transfer as an option for future water management in the region, as needed and following thorough scientific evaluation. Interbasin transfers of water exist in many places in Georgia at this time. The Council recognizes that interbasin transfers (existing or future) can play an important role in water resource management. Interbasin transfers of water can provide supply or flows to a receiving basin where water is needed. Rules recently adopted by the Georgia Board of Natural Resources in January 2011 will help to ensure that future permits for interbasin transfers are thoroughly evaluated.2 
. 	The Council recommends that irrigation suspension be used only through implementation of the Flint River Drought Protection Act, only by voluntary means, with notification to farmers before March 1 when possible, and only as a last resort when other options are not available to address severe flow depletions. The Council supports voluntary implementation of the Flint River Drought Protection Act (OCGA §12-5-40) by EPD through an irrigation suspension auction, when absolutely necessary in abnormally dry periods and when other options are not available to address severe flow depletions. When possible, EPD should provide notification of use of the Flint River Drought Protection Act before the March 1 drought declaration deadline. Earlier notification to farmers would inform planting decisions and help reduce the cost to farmers and to the state for irrigation suspension. The Council acknowledges the need to improve drought prediction tools to support earlier notification and supports EPD efforts to develop better predictive tools.  The Flint River Drought Protection Act has not had adequate funding in recent years, and a reliable source of funding is needed. 
. 	The Council recommends that the Georgia General Assembly legislate authority to the Regional Water Councils, including the Upper Flint Council, to manage, plan and provide oversight of water resources within each region around the State. Funding should be provided to the Councils from State appropriations.  Revenue raising authority should be considered for these councils (similar to the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District). Funding raised should be used to provide for coordination and implementation of regional and state water plans and for studies, assessments and future plan updates within the respective regions. 
. 	The Council urges the State to seek a timely resolution of current interstate water issues that directly affect the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint Basin. The Council recommends the development of a tri-state framework designed 
2 See DNR Rules Chapter 391-3-6. 
September 2011 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
to address interstate water issues in the future and the inclusion of the Regional Water Councils within this framework. 
. 	The Council recommends continued coordination and cooperation among neighboring water councils.  The Upper Flint Council has worked closely with the Middle Chattahoochee and Lower Flint-Ochlockonee Councils, and our joint efforts will benefit our regions and the state as a whole. 
Coordinated Recommendations with Neighboring Councils: 
Throughout the process of developing this plan, the Upper Flint Council met several times with neighboring regional water councils to discuss shared water resources and topics of concern. The Council met several times with the Lower Flint-Ochlockonee and Middle Chattahoochee Councils and developed a collaboration with these councils that led to their agreement on a set of joint recommendations. The following joint recommendations were approved by all three councils. The agreement among these councils on these recommendations indicates the importance of these recommendations to the Apalachicola-Chattahoochee-Flint Basin, of which all three councils are a part, and to the state as a whole. 
These joint recommendations overlap with some of the Upper Flint Council’s own management practices and recommendations. Where overlap does occur, the Council does not see any conflict; the Council’s management practices and recommendations generally provide more detail than the joint recommendations. In all cases, the Council’s own regional water plan takes precedence over the joint recommendations.  
The Upper Flint, Lower Flint-Ochlockonee, and Middle Chattahoochee Councils:  
. 	Recognize the critical need for more storage in the Apalachicola­Chattahoochee-Flint (ACF) System and recommend that a plan for additional storage be developed and implemented and that it consider the following: better utilization of existing storage in the Chattahoochee, new storage in the Flint, and enhancement of existing storage capacity. 
. 	Urge EPD and those involved in the resource assessment modeling to improve upon existing models for future regional water planning by making greater use of actual and current data on water use and conditions and by developing assumptions that more closely approximate actual conditions.  
. 	Request that state and federal agencies reevaluate the scientific justification for the minimum flow requirements at Woodruff Dam that are intended to maintain healthy aquatic ecosystems. 
7-17 
   [This Page Intentionally Left Blank] 
