
7. IMPLEMENTING WATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 


7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Primary responsibility for 
Section 7. Implementing Water 
implementing the regional plan will 
Management Practices 
be on the local level; however, State agencies are requested to assist 
This section presents the Savannah-Upper 
with implementation. The Council 
Ogeechee Council’s roadmap for the 
suggested short-term and long­
implementation of the water management 
term actions for the recommended 
practices identified in Section 6.  As the State 
priority management practices. 
Water Plan provides, this plan will be primarily 
Implementation schedules for 
implemented by the various water users in the 
additional management practices 
region. This section describes the suggested roles and responsibilities of the implementing are to be determined by local parties as well as the fiscal implications of the governments, utilities and permit practices. holders based on needs identified in 
detailed local master plans. 
7.1. Implementation Schedule and Roles of Responsible Parties 
The implementation schedule and roles of responsible parties for priority management practices (management practices selected to address Resource Assessment gaps or existing regulations) are detailed in Table 7-1. The timeframe for implementation has only been identified for the priority management practices detailed in Table 6-1A.  Anticipated timeframes for implementation actions are defined as initial (2011-2012), short-term (2012-2016) and long-term (beyond 2017). 
The Council recommends that timeframes for implementing other voluntary management practices (Table 6-1B) be determined by affected water users/entities, based on the type of projects selected to address specific needs and following detailed analysis conducted by local entities.  Implementation of infrastructure projects, such as construction of a new reservoir or expansion of a wastewater treatment facility, often require much longer times and cannot be easily compared to implementation of ongoing programmatic measures, such as  stormwater or water conservation education programs.  The Council’s recommended management practices, if implemented, will work toward preventing or closing potential future gaps and meeting regional goals.  The Council advocates that the recommended management practices be reviewed and updated as necessary in subsequent 5-year plan updates, based on newly available data, information, and implementation results. 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
Water Demand Management Practices  
WD1 - Implement Tier 1 Water Conservation Practices and Other SB370 Requirements  • Municipal / Industrial Water Withdrawals • Agricultural Surface Water Withdrawal (Initial Implementatio n Steps Item 5 only)  • Complete DNR Board Rule Making for new conservation requirements by June 2011 • Public water systems to begin preparing water system audit and water loss detection program report results to EPD Water loss audit:   >10,000 served by 1/1/2012  All others by 1/1/2013 • Adopt outdoor watering ordinance (not allowed between the hours of 10am and 4pm, with exemptions) by 1/1/2011 • Amend local building codes by to require:  (a) submetering for all newly constructed multi-unit buildings;  (b) High efficiency plumbing fixtures (1.28 gal/flush) in all new construction; and (c) high-efficiency cooling towers in new industrial construction. • Agricultural permit holders to comply with new requirements regarding classification of existing agricultural water permits by status (active, inactive and unused permits)  • Comply with existing and new rules by dates specified • As necessary and based on water audits and water loss detection program results, select areas that require improvements and implement loss reduction measures • Continue public education and awareness programs about outdoor watering restrictions  • Conduct surveys (based on annual progress reports) to gauge effectiveness • Revise public education and awareness program if necessary to improve effectiveness  Initial Implementation: • DNR Board, EPD • Municipal and industrial water withdrawal permittees • Local governments (planning and zoning office or department) • Local governments (planning and zoning office or department) • Agricultural permittees and EPD Short-term Actions: Municipal / Industrial Water Withdrawal Permittees Long-term Actions: • Regional Survey: EPD working with Council and Regional Commissions or DCA; Agricultural Survey: EPD with Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC) and County Extension Services • Local governments or utilities Agricultural Survey: EPD with GSWCC, County Extension Services and Georgia Farm Bureau  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
WD2 – Evaluate/ Encourage  Tier 2 (Non-Farm) Water Conservation Practices  Municipal / Industrial Water Withdrawals   • Complete DNR Board Rule Making for new conservation requirements by June 2011; • Continue implementation of existing programs  Comply with existing and new rules by dates specified in rules  • Conduct surveys to gauge effectiveness, • Continue implementation and revise  • DNR Board, EPD • Municipal / Industrial Water Withdrawal Permittees (including  
and evaluate applicability of additional Tier 2 practices and cost implications  program, if necessary.  thermoelectric power production)  
WD3 – Evaluate/ Encourage  Tier 3 & Tier 4 Agricultural Water  Agricultural Withdrawal  • Evaluate and identify preferred conservation options based on irrigation conditions  • Identify existing and potential incentive programs, with help from Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission and Farm Bureau  • Continue implementation of selected practices  • Agricultural permittees with help from GSWCC, County Extension Services and  
Conservation Practices  • Evaluate potential inclusion of permit conditions (EPD)  • Work with GSWCC and County Extension Services for outreach and education  • Revise outreach and education based on results  Georgia Farm Bureau • EPD  
WD4 – Monitor Agricultural Use in the Ogeechee River  Agricultural Withdrawal  Identify current permittees with and without water use meters  • Install meters for major users that do not have metering systems • Develop water use monitoring and reporting structure and database  • Continue water use monitoring and meter calibration program • Update of demand forecasts  • Agricultural permittees • GSWCC, County Extension Services and Georgia Farm Bureau  
• Develop meter calibration and replacement program  and Resource Assessment models based on monitored use  • EPD (for Resource Assessment Update)  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
Water Supply Management Practices  
WS1 Develop/Update Local Water Master Plans  Municipal Water Withdrawals  • Initiate master planning by updating population and demand forecast for local service areas and identifying system needs and options  Conduct alternatives analysis; identify and prioritize projects (including new, replacement repair and  Implement priority projects and update master plan every 5 years based on  Local governments / Utilities  
• Integrate Regional Water Plan recommendations  rehabilitation projects) to address long-term needs  growth 
WS2 – Monitor Streamflow to Confirm the Frequency and Magnitude of the Predicted Gap  EPD and USGS to coordinate  • Secure funding for additional flow monitoring and • Determine locations for monitoring in the Ogeechee Basin  Installation of flow monitoring stations and begin monitoring daily flow and low flows; compare monitored flow conditions to model predictions  • Continue low flow monitoring and comparison of observed low flow conditions to model predictions • Update Resource Assessment models based on observed low flows and revised water use and projections  • EPD (coordination and Resource Assessment) • USGS (flow monitoring and record keeping) • GEFA (funding)  
WS3 Conduct Instream Flow Studies  EPD, WRD and USGS to coordinate  Secure funding for an initial “pilot­scale” study in the Ogeechee Basin  Determine scope and locations to conduct instream flow study (suggest one location each in the Upper and Lower Ogeechee Basins). Begin and complete the “pilot” study in the basin.    Expand study locations as necessary; modify scope and content of studies from lessons learned from the pilot study  • EPD • WRD • USGS • GEFA  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
WS4 - Increase Groundwater Supplies  Agricultural Withdrawal  • Initiate strategic planning that includes identifying site-specific needs for groundwater wells over the next 40 years • Identify a primary agency to lead outreach program and to develop an incentive program to reduce reliance on surface water for irrigation during summer low flow periods  • Begin permitting process for new wells • Construct new wells as needed and as funding allows • Develop outreach program to explain the need to increase groundwater use during summer low flow periods   • Continue permitting process for new wells • Construct as needed and as funding allows • Revise strategic plan every 5 years in conjunction with  Regional Water Plan update  • EPD (planning) • GSWCC, County Extension Services or Georgia Farm Bureau • Agricultural permittee (Installation of wells)  
WS5 – Decrease Surface Water Use during Low Flow Periods  Agricultural Withdrawal  • Identify funding sources and a lead agency (such as GSWCC or County Extension Services) to help develop drought management plans for agricultural permittees • Review current agricultural withdrawal permits for potential modifications to protect minimum instream flows during low flow and drought conditions  • Develop drought management plan and implement instream flow protection measures • Incorporate drought management into new agricultural withdrawal permits  • Continue to work with agricultural withdrawal permittees and EPD to develop permit modifications • Update of Resource Assessment models based on monitored use and instream flow protection measures  • EPD • GSWCC, county Extension Services or Georgia Farm Bureau • Agricultural permittees  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
WS6 - Increase Wastewater Returns to the Little Tennessee River  Municipal and Industrial NPDES Permits  • Initiate strategic master planning that includes identifying site­specific alternatives to OSSMS over the next ten years. • Based on wastewater master planning and  • Begin process to develop alternatives to siting new OSSMS • Request new or revised waste load allocation for the selected local option • Apply for revised  Design and Construction  Local governments, and municipal/ industrial NPDES discharge permittees  
Regional Water Plan recommendations, evaluate new treatment options  permit based on selected option • Begin preliminary design  
Water Quality Management Practices  
WQ1 - Develop/ Update Local Wastewater Master Plans  Municipal NPDES Permits  Initiate master planning that includes the following: • Update of local population and demand forecasts • Evaluate future service area strategies  • Conduct alternatives analysis; identify and prioritize projects (including new, replacement, repair and rehabilitation projects) to address  • Revise master plans every 5 years based growth and  Regional Water Plan Update recommendations  Local governments / Utilities  
• Identify system needs and options • Integrate Regional Water Plan recommendations  long-term needs • Implement priority projects as appropriate  • Continue implementation of priority projects   


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
WQ2 - Upgrade Existing Wastewater Treatment Facilities  Municipal & Industrial NPDES Permits  Based on wastewater master planning and Regional Water Plan recommendations,  • Request new or revised waste load allocation for the selected local option • Apply for revised permit based on  • Design and Construction • Include results of implementation in 5-year  Local governments, and municipal/ industrial NPDES discharge  
evaluate options for upgrade  selected option • Begin preliminary design  Regional Water Plan update  permittees  
WQ3 - Construct New Advanced Wastewater Treatment Facilities  Municipal & Industrial NPDES Permits  Based on wastewater master planning and Regional Water Plan recommendations, evaluate treatment options  • Request for new or revised waste load allocation for the selected option • Apply for revised permit based on selected option • Begin preliminary design  • Design and Construction • Include results of implementation in 5-year Regional Water Plan update  Local governments, and municipal/ industrial NPDES discharge permittees  
WQ4 - Develop and Implement TMDL Management Plans  Municipal & Industrial NPDES Permits  Continue to participate in the TMDL development and implementation process for the  • Continue to participate in the Savannah Harbor TMDL implementation process • Work with EPD as  Update TMDL implementation plans, as needed, based on water quality and biological monitoring data as well as  Initial Implementation: EPD, Municipal and Industrial NPDES permitees Short-term Actions: EPD, Municipal and Industrial NPDES permittees  
Savannah Harbor  it further models potential impaired streams  Resource Assessment results  Long-term Actions: EPD working with Council and Regional Commissions or DCA  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
Other Water Management Practices  
ED1 - Develop Regional Educational Program and  Materials for Localized Implementation  All Water Withdrawal and NPDES Permits  • Coordinate with DCA, Regional Commissions and other Councils for the establishment of regional education programs. • Perform an inventory of existing education materials from  • Begin developing educational materials and public awareness programs tailored to Region's needs and issues • Develop additional outreach and promotional materials for economic development, focusing on the abundant water resources of the  • Conduct survey to gauge effectiveness • Revise programs as needed  Initial Implementation: EPD and Council to work with Regional Commissions, DCA with support from Association of County Commissioner of Georgia (ACCG), Georgia Municipal Association (GMA), Georgia Rural Water Association and Georgia Association of Water Professionals  
AWWA, GAWP and established water districts (in State or out of State)  region • Local entities to customize materials as needed and implement educational and outreach programs  Short-term Actions: All of the above plus local governments Long-term Actions: All of the above; survey lead - Regional Commissions or DCA  


Table 7-1: Implementation Schedule Priority Water Management Practices to Address Resource Assessment Gaps or Existing Regulations  
Action(s) Needed  Permit Category of Responsible Parties  Initial Implementation Step(s) 2011-2012  Short-term Actions (Years 2-5) 2012-2016  Long-term Actions: 2016 and beyond (after 5 year update)  Responsible or Potentially Affected Parties  
ED2 - Promote Coordinated Environmental Planning  All Water Withdrawal and NPDES Permits  Coordinate with DCA regarding potential revisions to Chapter 110-12­1, Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and Part V Environmental Planning Criteria to  Implement revised Part V Environmental Planning Criteria (Chapter 391-3-16) of Georgia Planning Act of 1989 for the protection of: • Water supply watersheds  Continue integration of Regional Water Plan and Comprehensive Planning Process and implement  Initial Implementation: Council and EPD to work with Regional Commissions, and DCA Short-term Actions: Local governments /  
facilitate incorporation of Regional Water Plan in the Comprehensive Planning process  • Groundwater recharge areas • Wetlands • River corridors • Mountains  recommendations as appropriate  Utilities Long-term Actions: Local governments / Utilities  
WD – Water Demand Management WS – Water Supply Management WQ – Water Quality Management ED – Education Initiatives Source: Technical Memorandum - Management Practices Selection (May 2011)  


7.2. Fiscal Implications of Selected Water Management Practices 
The following sub-sections discuss planning-level cost estimates and potential funding sources and options.  Successful implementation of the Regional Water Plan hinges on the ability of the State and local governments to fund the needed implementation actions. 

7.2.1. Planning Level Cost Estimates 
Table 7-2 describes the fiscal implications of the priority management practices. Cost estimates for implementation are included to the extent possible, based on possible implementation unit (per capita, per study, per MGD of plant capacity, etc.). The table is designed so that local governments/jurisdictions or other permit holders and water users can estimate budget requirements for the implementation of the recommended management practices.  

7.2.2. Funding Sources and Options  
The ability of the responsible parties to successfully implement the management practices identified in this plan depends on the availability of funding.  It is essential that a funding mechanism be identified, both at the State and local level to support the long-term implementation of the Regional Water Plan.  Affected parties in the region will be responsible for determining the best combination of funding sources/options for implementing applicable management practices. 
For local governments/utilities, water and sewer rates can be designed to provide a steady revenue stream to support implementation of certain actions.  Other potential sources of funding for local governments and utilities can include general funds raised through property taxes or service fees, bonds, loans (such as loans from the Georgia Environmental Finance Authority), and grants.  One existing program worth mentioning is DCA’s “WaterFirst”.  WaterFirst communities receive discounts on interest rates for loans.  The program is a voluntary partnership between local governments, State agencies, and other organizations working together to increase the quality of life in communities through the wise management and protection of water resources. It promotes a proactive approach to water resources that makes the connection between land use and water quality and quantity, which is consistent with the Council’s goal. Details of this program can be found on the DCA website1 . 
For agricultural (farmers) or industrial (industries or businesses) permit holders, the sources of funding include investment by the individual or business, grants, and/or incentive programs.    
SAVANNAH-UPPER OGEECHEE 

1. http://www.dca.state.ga.us/development/EnvironmentalManagement/programs/water_first.asp 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities (associated with Priority Water Management Practices in Tables 6-1 and 7-1)  
Management Practice  Capital/ Programmatic Cost Range  Funding Sources and Options  Notes and Sources for Costs  
WD1 - Implement Tier 1 Water Conservation Practices and Other SB370 Requirements  Cost varies based on practices  Water/wastewater system revenues; State and local government incentive programs  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 for various demand management practices  
WD2 - Evaluate/ Encourage Tier 2 (Non-Farm) Water Conservation Practices  Cost varies based on practices  Water/wastewater system revenues; State and local government incentive programs  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 for various demand management practices  
WD3 -Evaluate/ Encourage Tier 3 and Tier 4 Agricultural Water Conservation Practices  Cost varies based on practices  State incentive programs  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
WD4 - Monitor Agricultural Use in the Ogeechee River Basin  $2,500 - $5,000 per user monitored $8,000 - $16,000 per year for data keeping and coordination  Local governments; State incentive programs (potential)  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 page 6  
WS1 Develop/ Update Local Water Master Plans  $30,000 - $300,000 per plan depending on size of the system and scope of study  Water/wastewater system revenues; State incentive programs (potential)  Water system modeling, if desired, may add to overall cost of master plan2  
WS2 - Monitor Streamflow to Confirm the Frequency and Magnitude of the Predicted Gap  $30,000 to $60,000 / new gage station installation; $15,000 annual maintenance  State and USGS  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 page 6;  Cost for Resource Assessment is not included  
WS3 - Conduct  Instream Flow Studies  $4,000 - $20,000 biological monitoring per site $70,000 - $200,000 per study - cost varies based on scope  State; State or Federal grant  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 page 6 Colorado Water Supply Reserve Account Annual Report 2009  
WS4 - Increase Groundwater Supplies  $30,000 -$300,000/MG; cost varies based on location  State Incentive programs, private investment  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
WS5 – Decrease Surface Water Use during Low Flow Periods  $1,000 - $5,000/MG  State Incentive programs  EPD Supplemental Guidance1 Cost range is for conservation practices only  
WS6 - Increase Wastewater Returns to the Little Tennessee River  Cost varies based on density of customers served by sanitary sewer $0.5 to $1 /MGD  Water/wastewater system revenues; State incentive programs (potential)  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  


Table 7-2: Cost Estimates for Implementation Responsibilities (associated with Priority Water Management Practices in Tables 6-1 and 7-1)  
Management Practice  Capital/ Programmatic Cost Range  Funding Sources and Options  Notes and Sources for Costs  
WQ1 - Develop/ Update Local Wastewater Master Plans  $30,000 - $250,000 per plan depending on size of the system and scope of study  Water/wastewater system revenues; State incentive programs (potential)  Sewer system modeling, if desired, may significantly increase overall cost of master plan2  
WQ2 - Upgrade Existing Wastewater Treatment Facilities  $4 - $10 Million per MGD  Local governments / utilities, State (GEFA)  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
WQ3 - Construct Advanced Wastewater Treatment Facilities  $7 - $11 Million per MGD  Local governments / utilities, State (GEFA)  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
WQ4 - Develop and Implement TMDL Management Plan  Cost varies based on complexity of surface water system and number of dischargers  Water/wastewater system revenues; grants  N/A  
ED1 - Develop Regional Educational Program and  Materials for Localized Implementation  $0.10 - $2.25 per capita  State, Local governments/utilities  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
ED2 - Promote Coordinated Environmental Planning  $0.10 - $0.50 per capita  State, local governments/utility fees  EPD Supplemental Guidance1  
WD – Water Demand Management WS – Water Supply Management WQ – Water Quality Management ED – Education Initiatives Sources: 1. Supplemental Guidance for Regional Planning Contractors: Water Management Practice Cost Comparison, EPD (April 2010); 2. Jacobs JJG, various recent projects  


7.3. Alignment with Other Plans 
The development of this Regional Water Plan builds upon the knowledge base of previous planning efforts by State and local governments and utilities.  Existing water- and wastewater-related plans and information sources are listed in the supplemental document Existing Plans for Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Water Planning Region (May 2011), which can be found at the following web address: 
http://www.savannahupperogeechee.org/pages/our_plan/documents/SupSec6_Existi ngPlans_SUO_May2011_FINAL.pdf 
Where appropriate, local planned projects and successful management practices were considered in the development of this plan.  No known major conflicts between this regional plan and other plans have been identified.  The Council encourages continuing alignment with all local and regional efforts for update of future regional plans. Coordinated Environmental Planning is recognized as a priority management practice, so that recommendations in the Regional Water Plan can be incorporated in other major regional or local planning, such as comprehensive land use plans, transportation plans, or local master plans. 
Some differences exist in planning timing or cycle; for example, local comprehensive plans are typically prepared for a 20-year planning horizon; complete or partial update of the comprehensive plan can be prepared every 5 years.  Water and wastewater master plans and capital improvement plans are typically conducted for a 20- to 30-year planning horizon.  This Regional Water Plan has a 40-year planning horizon to allow major water supply needs and their long-term impacts on water resources to be evaluated.  The differences in planning horizons indicate that the projects identified in local plans may not completely address the resource gaps identified in this Regional Water Plan.  However, the potential trends and issues identified by this plan can be used to guide decision making by both local governments and State agencies to avert potential negative impacts on water resources in the region. 
The Council also recognizes that specific funding needs to be set aside for continuation of regional water planning, implementation, and Council activities. Without available funding, the future role of the Council is unknown.  The implementation of Regional Water Plans will largely depend on the availability of funding. 

7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
7.4. Recommendations to the State 
The Savannah-Upper Ogeechee Council recommends the following actions by the EPD to support implementation of the Regional Water Plan (Table 7-3).  These recommendations include additional funding, data collection, policy, coordination and public education and outreach necessary for improving future regional water planning efforts. 
Table 7-3: Recommendations to the State  
Funding  Identify long-term funding options and a coordinating agency(s) to assist responsible parties with Regional Water Plan implementation. Coordinate with GSWCC and develop additional funding to continue the agricultural metering program. Recommend State and Federal funding to support further optimization studies for the USACE lakes to include: minimum release flows and pool elevation modifications (Savannah River Basin Comprehensive Study Phase II)  
Additional Data (Surface Water)  Consider adding an additional planning node(s) in the Upper Ogeechee Basin for further refinement of the Surface Water Availability Resource Assessment model. Develop agricultural use metering program and monitor withdrawal from the nursery and agricultural industries in the region on a regular basis.   Evaluate instream flow and unimpaired flow assumptions in the Surface Water Availability Resource Assessment.  Consider pilot site-specific instream flow studies in the Ogeechee Basin (at locations predicted to  
have instream flow shortage).  In combination with a low flow monitoring program and an agricultural use metering program, confirm the magnitude and frequency of predicted gaps.  Update Surface Water Availability and Surface Water Quality Resource Assessment models based on the results of the studies for future Regional Water Plan update.  
Additional Data (Water Quality)  Continue monitoring on segments of streams predicted to exceed DO assimilative capacity; monitor rate of DO depletion and evaluate possible causes before determining actions to correct the potential impairment.  
Policy  Continue to study and evaluate current instream flow policy.  Encourage State funding for minimum instream flow and unimpaired flow research. Request EPD assistance in streamlining the reservoir permitting process.  


7. Implementing Water Management Practices 
Table 7-3: Recommendations to the State  
Coordination  Continue to  coordinate with SCDHEC and SCDNR on Savannah River water resources  Coordinate with USGS regarding its 5-year water use data collection efforts so these data can be aligned with other EPD data reporting efforts and used for future regional planning purposes.  
Public Education and Outreach  Develop regional education materials for use and customization by local entities.  

The Council specifically requests that EPD, working in conjunction with the USACE and through the Savannah River Basin Comprehensive Study update process, evaluate adaptive management techniques and potential revisions to operating protocols that would minimize the use of the available conservation storage. Currently, the USACE is working with the States of Georgia and South Carolina to secure funding for the next phase of Comprehensive Study update. Topics to be investigated with the Comprehensive Study update are recommended to include: 
1. 	
Management of the Savannah River Basin in a more adaptive manner by releasing less water from the Thurmond dam if adequate river flows are occurring downstream.  Generally speaking, it is in the best interest of all stakeholders within the Savannah River Basin to keep the lakes as full as practical and as long as practical, so that stored water is available to release in times of lower rainfall.  

2. 	
Evaluate potential revisions to the rule curves for Lakes Thurmond and Hartwell. Evaluate whether the winter pool elevations could be beneficially raised. 

3. 	
Manage the USACE lakes more closely to the existing rule curves.  Evaluate the operational scenario where (a) downstream flow releases are reduced as soon as the lakes drop below the rule curves for Lakes Hartwell and Thurmond, and 

(b) reduce the range of lake level drop between trigger levels. 

4. 	
Consider further economic impact studies and protection of "the economic well being" of the communities that have developed both around the Corps projects and downstream in the basin as one of the goals of those projects. 

5. 	
Continue to evaluate the current minimum flow release below the Thurmond dam. 

6. 	
Evaluate potential negative impacts on the upper basin due to implementation of the Savannah River dissolved oxygen total maximum daily load and the proposed deepening of the Savannah Harbor.  

7. 	
Continue to evaluate the ecological impacts of any modifications to the management operations strategy. 
